I wanted to take this opportunity to thank,
first of all, as Caro said, we have been
working together for some time now, well, since March
with a great team: Travolution,
Universidad del Desarrollo, Ladera Sur and
Colab.  We've truly built a fantastic
team, a big round of applause for everyone.
I want to take advantage of that space.
Different profiles, different
territories.  We are different
organizations, but we
complement each other very well.
So it has been, to be honest, a pleasure to work together, a learning experience and a bit stressful these last few days as always, but above all else we enjoyed it and had fun.  So we hope
you were able to
enjoy it too.  We would also like to thank those who
joined us these past two days, those
who were able to come, and our
guests who came from northern
Chile, southern Chile, and other
countries such as Colombia, Costa Rica, and
Argentina.  Hey, to those who are
also following us via live streaming
.  All the
content will be recorded.  We have a lot of
work to do after the event, and
hopefully we can create
audiovisual capsules and continue
sharing the great content we've
been working on.  So, well, you'll be
hearing more from us in
the coming weeks, hopefully.  And now it is my turn,
after a tremendous tribute
to indigenous women on their
international day, again their tribute and
recognition, it is my turn to
introduce this panel on
governance, development, inclusion and
a little bit of governance for
conservation.  Well, we've been
working for some time now with different cases and
different governance models that we
wanted to bring to this panel, and they form
the common thread
that we wanted to build for the
content of these two days of work,
and this content is inspired by
the presentation that
Barbara Saavedra gave yesterday.  We've had
many conversations with Bárbara,
also with Alejandra Figueroa from Penud,
and obviously with each of the
guests, and that allowed us here at
Trap, with the team, to develop this
common thread. That's why we
wanted to include different models and
cases of local governance from the
territory, which, from different
perspectives and approaches,
through work with the
private sector, through work with
academia, through the organization of
civil society, have been working on
local governance for the conservation
of the territory and the conservation of
nature, biodiversity, and
cultures.  So that's why
today I want to introduce my
star panelists, uh I'll
call them up, so they get excited and come forward.   I'm
going to start with my homeland.  Well, I
'm Argentinian, obviously I've been
here in Argentina for 10 years and we're going to start
with Seba Malicia.  Sebastián Malicia
comes from northern Argentina from the
Proyungas Foundation.  He is a lawyer,
specializing in environmental law, and
is the executive director of the foundation.
Thank you very much, Eva.
Pato Micayo continues.  Patricio Merino comes
from the other end of the far south.  He is the
executive director and co-founder of the
Pitipalena Añihé Marine Protected Areas Foundation.  It comes from
the Raúl Marín Balmaceda reserve,
way down south, and it comes from there.
So thank you very much for joining us.
and he is also president of the local
Sustainable Fishermen's Association
.  Okay, let's continue with Antonio
Mamani.  He comes from the
Aymara indigenous community of Cancosa, and there are also
other communities and communes that
are accompanying us.  He is a geologist by
profession and is also working
as a local manager in the design of a
local environmental unit for
conservation.  And I continue with my last
panelist, Francisca Carvajal.  She
comes from here in the Valparaíso region
and is the executive secretary of the
management committee of the Peñuelas Camp Biosphere Reserve
.  And speaking of,
thank you very much Fran for joining us,
referring to, well, to the
UNESCO MAV program, which is the program that supports
the development of
biosphere reserves globally and which
accompanied us during the development of
this event.  So, once again,
thank you.  We were also going to have
representatives from
a Biosphere Reserve in
Peru, but unfortunately, at the last minute, they
couldn't join us, so we are
grateful for their
intention to be able to attend.  Well,
how are you
after this introduction?
Great, very happy to be here.
We have a challenge now because we have a
lot of audiovisual support material and I
'm not there to do it, so I'm going to
thank my colleagues in
audiovisual to support me with that.
Well, we have several
topics for us to talk about.  The
idea is to be able to ask some
questions to each person individually and then a
common question that we have there to
link a little to what Mauricio
Fabri presented earlier about
biodiversity and development.  But I want to
start with my homeland.  No
preferences, right?  He's leaving.  Well, you
at Fundación
Proyunga have been working for some time on
local governance, especially in the far north,
through community tourism, through
the creation of
ecotourism corridors, but also through
the integration of the productive sector in
conservation, in the protection
of wild areas.  And when we were
having our conversations, and they
always talk a little about the
virtuous model they've created, they say, "Because
ultimately, we are all responsible for
conservation, not just
private companies, not just the government, not just
civil society, but you have
managed to develop a model that has been
operating in Argentina and also
here in Chile, which is the PPP model. If you'd
like to tell us a little bit about that
model, about what
protected production practices are all about."
Yes, that's right. Thank you, Patricia. Well,
good morning everyone. I'm really
happy to be here
sharing a bit about the work we've been
doing in northern Argentina,
and we've
recently been expanding to countries like Paraguay,
Bolivia, Chile, and Uruguay.
The program recently arrived there as well.
This program,
which you'll see happening
in the slides—there's information there—was
born out of a conflict,
right? We've been an NGO for 25 years
working on
nature conservation issues, and one day we
found ourselves facing a deadlock.
Classic conflicts, right? Between a company that wanted to clear land to increase production and a sector represented by somewhat more traditional NGOs that were saying, "No, we can't allow any more, this isn't necessary." And the conflict was stuck there; we saw that something was missing, that we were only looking at the area where the conflict was and not seeing the bigger picture, right? So, in this eagerness to find better solutions, alternative solutions, we stepped back a bit and started to look and investigate beyond what was on the table. I think this has to do with these negotiation issues. I'm a lawyer by training, I ended up involved in this many years ago, but sometimes you try to get out of the knot of the conflict and try to see where we can find a solution, right? And that's when we saw that the company that wanted to clear 15 hectares actually had 150,000 hectares within its holdings, its property, of which it had already transformed about 45,000; it needed a little
Furthermore, they had 100,000 hectares of forest in a spectacular state of conservation adjacent to a national park, creating a buffer between the productive area and the national park. It was a place that harbored biodiversity. It was a place where water was generated, and we said, "Wow, we're pointing the finger at this territorial actor, this company, as if they want to clear 100 hectares, and we're not seeing that they're actually conserving 100,000." This clearly raised a conflict, but then yesterday someone said, right? They quoted a line from The Little Prince that says what is essential is invisible to the eyes. We thought about that a bit, didn't we? Sometimes, by focusing on the problems, we lose this perspective and stop seeing other things that are there. In that conflict resolution, what we saw was that the company could contribute, and we also asked them to make commitments through land-use planning, by creating a management plan, by committing those 100,000 hectares to conservation, and by improving productive aspects.  that could be improved, to
enable new spaces in less environmentally sensitive areas
; in other words,
there was a whole series of decisions, and from
there this
program, which you see as
protected productive landscapes, began to emerge.
And the order of the words is actually
very important. First, it's about
looking at a landscape, then productive,
because something we started
asking ourselves at that time was, who
assumes the cost of conservation?
We've been talking since yesterday about how
great
biodiversity conservation is, the importance of
biodiversity conservation for
different types of
tourism, conservation, and
local development projects. The question I
ask you is, who takes on that
cost? Because conservation costs
money. Who is going to be responsible
for providing that money? And what we
thought at that time was that it has to
be the companies, it has to be those
same companies, the productive sector—I don't mean
companies, they could be cooperatives,
isolated producers—but those who
are using resources to
generate food, mineral products, and
so on, they also have to be
actively involved, and in a way
that allows  Monitoring, measurable, with
indicators, but they have to be
actively involved in
conservation actions, and that at the time was
a solution to that problem, but
we saw that there were many more
opportunities. The program began to
grow. Today we are close to
3,000 hectares among almost 60
companies, of which more than
half, or almost half, are
wild areas where
biodiversity is conserved, and we want that to continue
and for the
companies to be the ones paying for this,
supporting this, as we say in
Argentina, right? We believe that this
is just the beginning, the beginning of the whole
story because there are many more
areas, and we have to integrate
other territorial actors into the management:
neighbors,
local governments, communities, residents, and so on.
And from the productive sector in Argentina,
for example, who are you
working with?
We are working with companies.
We started with this company, I tell you, that
made sugar from sugarcane
and paper. Then citrus companies joined
. Today we work with
companies in the sector
Forestry, citrus, paper, grains, livestock, yerba mate, tea. And recently, we've added a mining company that produces lithium. A winery in Mendoza. A company that bottles natural water in Mendoza has also joined. I don't want to mention the names of the companies; the maps are there, and it's no secret, but more and more are joining, right? Actually, any production, including marine areas, any production with a territorial presence could be added to this program. And generally, the owners of these ventures are not only owners of the productive land but also owners of large wilderness areas. That needs to be valued, rescued, made visible, and given a commitment to their long-term care. Thank you very much, Seba Pato. We're heading south now. You were telling us that you've been co-managing the protection, surveillance, and security of this marine area in Pitipalena, in Iwé, for the past 10 years. Raúl, Raúl Fernández, tell us a little bit about that.  How did it come about? What is the
challenge of this co-management that you are
doing, and the work of the foundation?
Would you like to start with the video? Would you like to
introduce it? Let's watch the video
with sound.
This coastal marine protected area
was always envisioned as a
joint, participatory management between the
community and the ministry.
The call from both the ministry and
ourselves is to validate this with the
entire community. We all love this
place, this territory, and we want to
take care of it. Something fundamental is to inform
each of the inhabitants of Raúl
Marín Barmacea about this marine
protected area so that they feel
involved in this process and
increasingly become protagonists and
part of this work and the management of the
marine protected area. I have really
liked the work you have
been doing because you have involved
the children a lot, and that is what matters most, that
the children get involved
so that they want this, so that they
feel part of it. It belongs to everyone, and we
all have to take ownership of it and
make it ours because it belongs to everyone.
[Music]
[Applause]
Okay,  Let me introduce myself. My name is
Patricio Merío, and I'm the executive director
of the foundation we created
10 years ago. This is a
very special marine protected area because it has
three systems present within it: a
fjord system, a marine system, and a river system.
Right? So, in that sense, what happens
there is incredibly important from a
geographical point of view, given that different species live in
each of these systems or
ecosystems,
each associated with its specific system.
Now, you were asking me about
governance, right? About how all of
this came about, and it all started in
2002.
At that time, CONAMA existed,
the ministry wasn't yet, and at that
moment, this place was already seen
as a priority for
conservation. And over
time, in 2007, there was an
intervention, an idea to
protect this place, but it
ultimately fell through because,
well, the conclusions one draws over
time are that if...
It doesn't come from the community, and when other agents come along, let's say, to propose things, that's fine too, but when this comes from the community, it will always have much more support, because we live there all year round. I myself live 150 meters from the beach, so anything that happens there will directly affect me. So, it's not like you're told about it or you heard about it or not, it's something that's going to happen and something has to be done. You can't live in these places that are so delicate ecosystemically speaking and do nothing, because the threats are always there, right? And at that time, between 2000 and 2011 and 2014, we worked in endless meetings with the Ministry, Suspesca, Cerna, the Fisheries Department, many actors, because in general it's not so easy to create marine protected areas in Chile, right? It's not always like, "Let's just do it." And it was in 2014 that...  The president there
signs the decree for the marine
protected area, and at that moment one says,
"Well, uh, we did it, we have the
area, right?" But no, that's when the real work begins,
and I learned that in the
moment because one says, "Okay, check
the decree, but that's just a piece of paper, that's a
signed piece of paper, it's good
intentions, right?, that we want to
protect it, but that's when the real
work begins."  That's the message,
because that's where the work really begins.
Without
effective management, nothing will happen in an area; it will just
remain a decree.  And in
2015 we were also, as I
say, like newbies to this system.
We, I am an artisanal fisherman, I
am also a fishing technician, but the
idea was always to take care of the place, right?
So we decided to create a
foundation from the community with
people from the locality, each
of us belonging to one of the
organizations.
In this sense, this model is very interesting because in article 7, I always highlight this because in article 7 of the decree creating this area, it speaks of how this area was created by the local initiative of the fishermen's union of Puerto Raúl Marín Almaceda and other organizations, right?  So, it's
quite unprecedented that a fishermen's union
is promoting the creation
of a protected area.  It doesn't
happen, no, it's not something that
usually happens.  So, from there I feel
that it all starts,
like, well
, it also helps that we are
a very small town.
According to the 2017 census, we are
2000, that is, 270 people already.  Well, while it
's true that we are a
small population, the fishing effort is
n't that great either.  So let's just say it
was a good breeding ground for
this to happen.
And how are they monitoring it?  How
are they currently working on this
co-management, on this oversight?  What
are the challenges?  Already.  Well,
about what I was saying before,
I feel that from 2000 to
2015, when the area was created in 2014,
until today, the governance, in my opinion,
has been a transitional governance.
That's what I call it because, while it's
true we created this foundation,
now that time has passed, you realize that maybe it
wasn't the most suitable structure,
but you only know that later, you know, deep down.
But it doesn't matter,
with the few resources we had,
we've managed to carry out this
project in co-management.  In 2021,
the Undersecretary of the Environment traveled to
Puerto Raúl Marín and signed, which
is also a unique case, a co-
management decree for the marine protected area with
the foundation that has the
same name as the area, Pitipolenañigü Marine Protected Area,
and there the ministry recognized this
co-management and we
officially became the
technical counterpart from the community with the
ministry.
So far so good, everyone was super happy,
but now, well, in 2019 the
first plan was created, the first management plan for a
multiple-use marine protected area in
Chile was that of Pitipalena.  The first
management plan with the
open PTEN standards.
So we
went, I always say, like with you
I learn a little bit about
the pilot case.  Sure, but that's both good
and bad.  I mean, I don't know if it's bad, but I
feel like it's good.  We have taken
very important steps in this that have
marked it, which is why I refer to it as the
transition.  And why do I say that?  Because
I feel that now the moment has come when,
well, the town of Puerto Raúl
Marín at that time was another
figure.  It was other actors, we're
talking about 10 years ago.  Now there is a
community, well, we've also been
broadcasting this area for 10 years
, so everyone there knows what
we're talking about.  So
there's also a much larger
empowered community wanting to get involved, and that
's a very good thing.  Already.  So, right now
we are on the verge of
renewing the management plan that lasts 5
years.  The Nature Fund already
helped us to manage
that, which started the work now and it's
super interesting because why do I say
transition?  I say this because at the
moment, governance in that place,
in that area, is provided by a
local management council, that's what it's called, right?  And it is
a council that brings together
all the organizations of
civil society, let's say, from R, the
Cino board, the fishermen's union, the
tourism G, the indigenous association and on the
other side the government bodies,
their armed fishing, right, Ministry
of Environment.
And in that sense I feel that what needs to be done now,
and I am
preparing it, that is, I am proposing it, let's
say, to the new plan,
is that
governance be and we can strengthen
this local management council, and the
foundation place itself, of course, alongside
all the local organizations
and contribute, and that each, that is, that each
organization can contribute from its
own expertise.  We have
cultural organizations, fishing organizations, and tourism organizations.
So, each one, from their own expertise, is
supporting this.  Already.
We've also had the opportunity
because we've had to travel
to many places, be in many
meetings, and at some point in 2017
we connected with
Impact 4 at that time in Serena, I don't
know if anyone went there, it's one
that went.  Well, at that moment
we met with the brothers from Juan
Fernández and Rapanui and this beautiful idea was born
to create the first network of
communities of marine protected areas
in Chile, it is called Red Cam Chile and here
are Rapanui, Juan Fernández and Puerto
Raúl Marín Balmacea.  Why these three
locations or communities?  Because these
three communities have been pioneers in
their areas, because these three
communities have an approved management plan
, because these three communities
managed to
create organizations specifically
for the co-management of the areas.  That's
very important.  Already.  The idea is that more
communities can join this network.   Already.
And that's very interesting to say
too because we started, but
because in one way or another we have been
reaching certain
levels of management, right?  But as a
fact, I can tell you that between the three
communities we managed to have more than 140
million hectares of poorly protected land.
So, in that sense, it makes us
very happy.  It has been a
constant feedback loop because there are
things that happen there but not here, and
vice versa.  So this
communication, this feedback that we've
had with the oceanic islands has
been incredible.  Last year we had the opportunity to
visit Rapa Nui and Juan Fernández.
They also went to Puerto Raúl
Marina to visit us.  So I feel that
this is very powerful, and I also want to invite
communities that have
protected areas to join in.
Pato, is this network good in Chile, is it
the only one?  It is unprecedented, and do you know of other
cases in other places where this
network of protected areas exists?
The truth is that, well,
there are many networks, there are global
conservation networks,
there are networks like for plastic, for example,
things like for specific
community issues.  I don't have data from
other sources, but I'm sure they must
exist.   I do
n't know if with this model.  Congratulations.
Anyway,
thank you very much
for those 140 million marine
protected areas.
Yes, yes.  We have 85% of the protected sea
located between these three communities.
We have the least,
but we are here in partnership with them.
They are the pioneers.  They are pioneers.
Thank you very much, Pato.
Okay, and now we're going north,
south.  It's an extreme, a very extreme,
remote one.  We're also going north
to another extreme area, to the
Tarapacá region, Cancosa.  How are you doing, Antonio?
Okay,
thank you very much for joining us today.
Well, we wanted you to tell us a little bit
, to share something with
us here.  As a community, you have already
organized yourselves and have been concerned for some time
about co-designing a
community environmental monitoring system that
also allows you to consolidate
environmental governance and thereby create
a local environmental unit.  If you
could tell us a little bit about how that
process was, why it arose, and how they
are organizing themselves.
First of all, uh, greetings to everyone
present, uh, I am
from the indigenous community
of Cancosa, and I would like to give you some
context.  We are located on the
border with Bolivia,
bordering the department of
Potosí.  Uh, we are a 20-minute
walk from Bolivia, from the border, and
we are a community that is uh from the
regional capital Quiquique
approximately 4 hours away and we are
also close to
4000 m in altitude.  That is our
reality.
Uh, in that sense, uh, the community,
well, the genesis of where it all starts from
is uh, and the
previous speaker was just talking about it, it has to do with the fact that
Cancosa was also an experiment.
Uh, in what sense?  When
the water code was decreed, one
of the first communities to
experience the
water code was the community of
Cancosa, right?  Uh, it was very difficult for
the community in the sense that our
uncles who were there at that time
couldn't understand,
or well, I think that to this day they
don't understand how the land was separated
from the water, and well, there are also other
laws that separate the land and the water
of the subsoil to extract other types of
resources.
And I think it happens to many
people who are very connected to the
land and who, in a way, don't
understand that one owns
something, but rather that one is part of something.
So, the genesis of the
Cancosa problem begins with the registration of
groundwater rights
by a project owner
associated with
copper mining, who ultimately
violated several principles of
good faith and trust with the
communities in this case. This was done
around 1982,
and by 1994
mining operations began in the Mamiña sector,
Cerro Colorado. After eight
years, the effects of the
drying up of the springs and
the damage to the vegetation cover—
our wetlands, or "pastures," as the
locals call them, or "bofedales," as they are
more technically known—wetlands became apparent.
So it's a conflict that arises from this series of changes happening in our country, and paradoxically, we are one of the communities experiencing the water code. Interestingly, I haven't found much literature on how this confrontation occurred between the Andean community, where one is part of something, not the owner of anything, but rather part of something, and ultimately, people didn't understand or didn't have the capacity to understand what it would mean for a company to own the groundwater.  And having said that
, this conversation also starts
under many premises, where it is also pointed out
in the
company's environmental impact studies that
ultimately this extraction was not going to
cause damage to the
ecosystem, but rather their
hydrogeological studies or models
indicated that the underground aquifer
was a deep aquifer, that it was
disconnected from the
surface aquifer and that ultimately this
extraction was going to have impacts
on the ecosystem, when I talk about
ecosystem, I am referring to the wetland and the
lagoon that was also generated there
adjacent to the wetland
and that's where it all starts.  So, as I was
saying, there is part of the
socio-environmental conflict that the community has
with this
project owner and from there, well, I was
n't even born when all
this started.  This was the year, I was born in the year 90 and this started back in the year 80. So, I had to live my entire adolescence under this mantle of comings and goings that began to emerge.
The community begins to empower itself,
obviously, when it sees significant damage
in its territory and
takes relevant actions, but
ultimately there are issues that are not
legislated within our
territory, which are often
the transactional agreements that exist
between private entities and communities, where
civil actions often end in
agreements that do
not reflect the needs of the
territories.
Well, however, many
interesting things were uploaded in the territory, I mean,
but well, that would take me away from
the question, but it does lead to
other topics.  For example, to
give a fact about the cause,
one sees that the case of the Punta
Negra salt flat there with the extraction of
Escondida and entered the
State Defense Council or in the case of the salt
recently with the Guivora company
as well, but curiously in the
case of Cancosa there was no support and
support was requested in this case from the state so
that it could have some kind of greater
intervention, but curiously it did not
happen.
Leaving these things aside, well, this
background, the community, already in
that period after the
impact generated in its
territory, takes action, it
begins to become more aware of the
environmental issue as such, because ultimately
these debates are technical, they are
environmental technical, because the head of the company with all
their statistics tells you that there is a
disconnection of the aquifer, that
ultimately this is climate change and
they start to generate a series of
arguments that ultimately the
communities are not prepared or do not
have the tools to
defend themselves and it ends up being the
state agencies talking with the private sector
and the community through the media saying,
"But it's not what you're
telling me."
And it is in this context that
this territorial defense is born, at
least for my generation, which is the one that has to
live this experience and
understands that we have to train ourselves,
understand the technical background and be
able to carry out this type of
territorial defense initiatives by
generating our own monitoring.
Uh, I know, well, the community too, uh,
when these
socio-environmental conflicts happen there is damage to the
social fabric, communities become
fragmented, they divide.
We were wandering around for a long time and a couple of years ago we were finally able to re-establish ourselves and, under a common objective related to territorial defense, to be able to fraternize among all of us and understand that we have to face this problem together, okay?  And it can't just be
the State and the owner making
decisions; it's up to
us to be involved.  There were two
actors conversing, but there was
this third actor, the community, who
was not part of the conversation.
So now we're in that role.
We started a couple of years ago to
build and carry out
our independent environmental monitoring
in all the components required in
this case by the RCA associated with the
project owner and in practical terms
from a governance perspective it has helped us a lot
to be able to unite in front of a
common goal.  I believe it is important
to find that common goal in
communities, so that we can look each other in the
eye and reach points of
agreement.  So, I believe that the issue
of environmental management has achieved that
in the community.  Despite this
fragmentation of the social fabric that
existed and that still remains,
this monitoring has not managed to unite us with
family lines and be able to carry out
an
independent community environmental monitoring that we
call Pampa de Lagunillas.
And as I was pointing out, today
this third actor, the
community, is considered to be
empowering itself, with people being
trained, and this has
also been with the support of external entities,
in this case the University of
Development. We achieved an
important support agreement, and they have been
our advisors and have helped us to
build this
independent environmental monitoring plan. And the
relevant thing, I think there is a point
in favor here, is that the construction originates
from the community.  We took
a proposal to the university with
our professionals, our
community members, and in this case the
university took it and we generated a kind of
co-design of a monitoring plan, that is, we carried it out
together, right?
This dynamic is not happening where an
external party brings us a proposal, puts it together,
and from that we put together a
proposal; instead, it has been a co-
design in conjunction with
external speakers, in this case with the
C+ research center.
Antonio, you spoke about the monitors and
community professionals who are there.
You form a local management team
, but who are those monitors?
What is this management team like?
From a practical point of view,
environmental governance consists of the
community board.  There are the
figures of local managers, who are
these people, uh professionals or
people with a certain degree of
technical competence who can understand
and generate this dialogue between what is uh
the dialogue with the institutions or
with private entities and transmit it in this
case to the board and the assembly.  Uh,
there's the figure, well, of the assembly,
which is the one that makes the decisions.
We have public and
private organizations, and there is also this
advisory figure which is very relevant and which
has to be part of the
support for the
environmental governance process.
And there is also a very important part
which is our environmental monitors.
In my case, as a professional I have had to
develop in a certain way
and look for opportunities
and I cannot be permanently in the
territory, but we have people who do
have those capabilities and they are
permanently our monitors
and they are our eyes with respect to the
project leaders and well, not
only to the project leaders,
but to any type of eventuality.
You know that things are happening on the border these days; there are
no longer just
socio-environmental conflicts, but also
issues related to security.
We have many elderly people living in
the territory and unfortunately on the
border or the northern limit of our
country and very complicated things happen there that are
not the topic of conversation
now, but I want to convey that to you.
So they also fulfill a role associated with
the issue of environmental territorial defense
, but also with
protecting the territory from other types
of threats.
Thank you very much, Antonio.  Okay, and now we're going
a little closer to home, to
the Valparaíso region.  Francisca,
you are a
biosphere reserve and our representative here
from Peru couldn't join us either,
but you are reserves.  When
we were talking to you, you mentioned that
you organized it, and your
management model is different.  You
also organized yourselves from civil society, well, obviously with other
entities involved.  Can you
tell us how you organized yourselves, how
this motivation to become a
biosphere reserve arose, and how you
currently operate?
Uh, well, thank you very much.  Well,
super interesting all the conversation
here taking notes from colleagues.
Uh, I think it stems from that image of us
being a biosphere reserve.  I
believe that much has been discussed yesterday and
today regarding what the limit is
of what we are protecting when
we talk about conservation.  Ultimately, it's not
just nature, but also
civil society, the
community.  And in that sense, the program of biosphere reserves, of man and biosphere, which is called the MAV program from UNESCO, what it seeks is precisely to reconcile the harmony of the relationship between humans and nature so that we can ultimately develop around these places of high biodiversity.
So, while the
La Campana Peñuela Biosphere Reserve, which is the one you
see in the image,
covers two regions, the
Valparaíso Region and the Santiago Region, was
declared 40 years ago.  Uh, it
was only in 2023 that a
process of incorporating the community
and empowered civil society began,
allowing them to enter the management committee,
which is the governance body of
these biosphere reserves.  Well
, one important thing, I think that
from the point of view of
considering the change in this
governance is that, well, I am from the
Regional Government of Valparaíso.  Uh, I
am part of this team that came
to the regional government a
period ago, already headed by
Governor Rodrigo Mondaca, who comes from
the social movements, so
listening to the demands of the
social movements was something very natural for him.
So, it also meant listening to
a demand that had been coming for 7 years
for the
binding incorporation, which is something very important.
Today we have
citizen participation exercises, but they are not
binding.  And the community in
Valparaíso, which is a region very
rich in terms of
biodiversity of fauna, flora, and
also in terms of the richness of
its resources, to put it in a
more anthropic way, generates
multiple conflicts over use.
So, there was also a
very empowered community wanting to
enter decision-making spaces
and they essentially raised a
demand towards the mayor's office at that
time.
So I also believe that there is an opportunity from the point of view of biosphere reserves today in our country in light of two major regulatory changes that we have had, right?  This creation of the
biodiversity service
recognizes biosphere reserves for the first time
within the Chilean regulatory framework.   It is
no longer just a
UNESCO declaration, but we have also
incorporated it as a country.  Oh, and also
the law for strengthening the
regions, which means that we have
select authorities in the regions who are accountable to
the demands of the citizens
.  So I think it's very
important that the change came from
society's demands, listening to
how it had to be done, because
I think it's something
to share, I think that afterwards
comes a panel of nature-based solutions
, right?  I believe that
nature is often discussed as an inspiration,
but we must also
remember that we are nature and we are the
biosphere, and that we too are part
of the inspiration.  So, when
we look at how to create a
governance model, well, we go to
communities and ask how they have done in
making decisions on
important issues in recent years.
So, there's no need to reinvent the wheel.
I believe that both in
nature, both we and the
fauna, flora, bacteria,
etc., there are patterns to
imitate, which I think is an
invitation to go out, to look, to observe
and to listen in order to ultimately
incorporate that into the management that
territories are currently demanding.
That.
Thank you very much, Francisca.  Seba,
we're going back north.  As another
governance model, you have been creating,
developing an ecotourism corridor
in the far north, as well as a
governance tool, a
public-private collaboration tool, a
community involvement tool, a
positioning and recognition tool for
that local value.  If you
can tell us how this ecotourism corridor came about
, how it is being formed, and
what its main purpose is.
Yes, this was born from this idea.  At
first I was telling them about the PPP,
right?  Of the protected productive landscapes
that were businesses, but
then as we added them up we saw
that they began to come together like
pieces of a puzzle, right?
Suddenly in a basin or along a river or in a certain place there were several social actors with whom we were working, not only companies, but also communities, local governments, etc.  We said, "
Wow, instead of working on
a more bilateral, one-on-
one relationship, we can start thinking
together, we can multiply the impact
, right? Clearly, it's not the
sum of the parts, but rather the impact is multiplied. And
here I also want to mention something that
you, Pato, as an Argentinian, know, you
know? That saying, 'God
is everywhere, but he has his office in
Buenos Aires.' We say that in Argentina,
right? And why am I telling you this?
Well, here you go, right? But why am I
mentioning this? Because if someone wanted to
travel and see different
places in Argentina, we
had, right? Iguazu Falls
as an already developed,
established destination, the Umahuaca Gorge, the
Iberá Wetlands, emerging more
recently, but also already developed,
but you had to travel from Buenos
Aires, right?
A foreigner arriving, if they wanted to go
from Iguazu Falls to
Jujuy, from Misiones to Jujuy,  Bordering
Chile, specifically in Jujuy, and
Brazil in the area of ​​the falls, there's no
direct flight, and taking a
bus can take, I don't know, two days
. Now, in that
territory
we have
the Puna, high Andean plains with
salt flats and a wealth of
spectacular landscapes.
Quebrado Mahuaca, recognized as a
UNESCO World Heritage Site. A biosphere reserve of the
Yungas, the mountain rainforests in
northwestern Argentina. And El Impenetrable,
which is the eastern part of the Chaco, the
heart of the Chaco, right? El Impenetrable.
Two rivers that cross it are the
Pilcomayo and the Vermejo, which, as rivers in
these places with so little water, harbor
and concentrate a great deal of
biodiversity. The Bañado de la
Estrella, a 400,000-hectare wetland that was
unknown until recently. The
Liberá wetlands, Iguazu Falls,
Moconá Falls, and also Misiones.  Well, as
we were saying, along this axis that roughly
follows the Tropic of
Capricorn,
there are a number of areas of
extremely high environmental value,
unparalleled scenic beauty, and a
very particular uniqueness. But
also, it must be said, it's the area
of ​​Argentina with the greatest
cultural diversity, the largest number of
Indigenous communities, and
unfortunately, the highest
poverty rates. Furthermore, it's the
area where there's pressure for
land transformation, where
crops,
livestock, and so on are expanding. So, as we were saying,
if we don't work with
a more holistic vision and try to
highlight all of this, we're
missing an
unparalleled opportunity. Also, since the
foundation's inception, we've enjoyed immersing ourselves in the
territory, exploring it
. We've been undertaking journeys,
traveling by boat, visiting
different places. And that's where
this idea came from: let's develop projects with
the provinces, with
local governments, but also with the
communities, with the people who live in
the territory, with the NGOs that are
working in...  The location and the
productive sector, let's start developing a
tourism axis that will be an engine of
development for the
territory, of inclusion, but
also of conservation and of highlighting the
value of these places, right? That's how
this idea of ​​the Capricorn ecotourism corridor was born,
which goes from the Puna
to the waterfalls. I have some
brochures here, I'll post them later. I didn't bring
many, but there are some if
you want to learn a little more. And the
challenge is to
develop this and also think about
governance, right? To think
a little about it because sometimes we
tend to see all this as positive,
as opportunities, but we also know
that there are risks, right? That as
people start arriving, they
start demanding resources; it's an engine
of development, but there are also
negative externalities, right? Increased
resource consumption,
waste generation, well, and a number of
associated things. So, the challenge is to be able to
think together and, above all, define
the development model that the
local people want, because ultimately, I was just
listening to
the other panelists and  These days
I was saying, "Why are we here these two
days locked up in this place
talking about all this, right?"  What
motivates us to leave everything we're
doing and come here and share
these spaces?  And I believe we
do this because we have faith, we have
hope that we can do something for
people, that from our own place we can
do something so that
people live better, so that people
have the same opportunities for development as everyone else
, so that
cultures are respected, so that those who don't know
these places can get to know them, and that,
well, we have to build it
together, there are no easy answers.  The
duck just said that it was making its way as it
walked, right?  And I think that's actually kind of what we
all feel, right?
And that gave me the opportunity to get back together with
Pato.  There you told us that they are in
a transition and that they have to renew
the management plan, especially within the
framework of the new SBAP law.  What is their
current situation?  How do
you begin to envision this renewal, and
well, the challenge and the
opportunities in this new
management plan, in this renewal?
Yes, yes.  Well, just as
we were the first with this plan and
open standards at the beginning, it just so happens
that now with this
new law, we're also going to
create the first plan that will be
developed with this law already in place.
So, it's a tremendous challenge to
improve what we realized over
time did
n't work well at first, because at the
beginning, as I was saying, it was
like a pilot, like everyone learning
the open standards for the first time.
So, there are many things that remained,
and that remained, well, I don't want to
say bad, but over
time we have realized that
things haven't been right,
and that's what needs to be improved.  For
example, uh, I don't know, in the first
management plan we had, no, no, it
wasn't valued.  How much does it cost
to implement that plan?  That's a huge piece of information, a
small detail.  Already.  So, when it comes to the fact that we've had to participate in fan racing, where you present yourself to donors, where it's possible to leverage resources, but if you're not clear on how much annual monitoring of your marine protected area costs, it's totally unprofessional and unserious to do this.
So, that's one of the first things this new plan has to bring, which, let's say, not associated with the plan itself, in the sense that the plan is committed to this, right? No, most likely it won't have the resources, but it will have a value, let's say, assumed by IEMS, let's say, I don't know if by IEMS, but by line of work, right?  Uh, monitoring,
surveillance, right?
Environmental education is like a series of qualifications that you have to work on over
time.
Okay, let's go, let's do it.
Yes, that's right,
Antonio.  No, you were telling us how they started
designing this model, the
environmental governance they are consolidating, and in
this sense I wanted to ask you if
you had any recommendations
for your own community that might
want to replicate this
governance model that you are
consolidating in other dimensions.
You are working in the environmental field,
there is the tourism dimension,
there are other dimensions within
local development, or other communities
like yours that would like to start
thinking about environmental governance.  What
recommendations would you give them?
Before going to the question, I forgot to give a piece of information about the cause in the previous question, which was very important, that the mitigation measure of the defedal is until 2075, so it is approximately 50 years that the monitoring of this will last.  So, I'm 30, I do
n't know if I'll make it,
and having this life already a little more
capital.
But
then it will be
transgenerational monitoring.  I think that maybe
my son, nephews will
potentially see if the
ecosystem recovers.
Okay, getting to the question, you pointed out
how this could be replicated in another
governance instance.  I think
the environmental aspect, I heard it the other day
and it made a lot of sense to me.
At least our community is
organized around
productive axes.
The Mara communities live off livestock
farming, mainly
agriculture, there is also
tourism, entrepreneurship, which are the
ones we have identified, but the
environmental aspect is not a productive axis
as such, because ultimately it must be
financed from something.  So, that's where
we have the first, in
quotes, economic disadvantage, but
important agreements have been reached that have
managed to maintain this sustainability
because it must be done, and what
we have also pointed out is that
the environmental aspect is relevant or
is the foundation for projecting
sustainable development in the community.
So we have many
attractions, I took the opportunity to mention them.
We have the Silluay volcano there, which is
very beautiful.  We have hot springs, there are
beautiful landscapes.  Well, the
same people.  The area is very beautiful.
It's like a
San Pedro, but
pristine, without so many tourists. I once heard people say it was like a San Pedro.
But for some reason we, well,
have to know how to exploit our
territory.  So we have
conveyed to another initiative, just as we
have not organized the
environmental part, what interests us in this
area of ​​the community and
we have the girls who
are more focused on tourism, that we have to
work together and
project a
tourism development strategy, but one that
considers the sustainability of the
territory.  So, I think that's
the line, I mean, we are, I think we are
doing things right, we are opening up
this perspective that
the colleague pointed out here, that
ultimately we focus on one
problem, but we have to broaden the scope a bit
and see that there are other variables
within it all, that it's not just the
environmental issue, it's not just, for example,
just the issue of
socio-environmental conflicts, but it also has to do
with development or thinking about what
a people, a
community, a human group wants.
So, at this stage
we are opening up this perspective
of knowing that while we have a
commitment to a
project owner that generated an impact
for 50 years, there are also other
relevant areas that need our
expertise and support,
not only for the
Cancosa community, but also for
neighboring communities to whom we can
transmit this experience and how
things should be done from the
local level.
Thank you, Antonio.  Francisca, you told us
the other day that you are participating in an
international competition promoted
by UNESCO for governance models of
different biosphere reserves, and
you are participating because what you
wanted to show and highlight there were
different success factors related to
the preservation of the territory, to the
actions and practices that help that
cohesion and governance in the
territory.  What practices did you
highlight?  Okay, so when will the
competition results be available?  I hope
soon.  Well, yes, look, I'd like to
tell you that, well, there are
756 biosphere reserves in the world, we have 10
in the country, two in the
Valparaíso region.  Juan Fernández is there
with the colleagues from
marine management and the Peñuelas bell.  And in that
sense, within the 10 reserves of
Chile, we apply this competition
which rewards the management of
reserves in the world.  It happens every two years
.  And what we wanted to do was
export good ideas
from Chile that I think can also be
exported in a certain way, in terms of
management methods, because I think that here we are
all involved in
conservation management and I think that for everyone,
the conversation between
the different actors who think and
want and have different interests is a headache.
So, that's the crux of the
matter regarding management.  And what
we are trying to show is that it can be
done when we all sit down and
listen to each other respectfully, with certain
representatives.  I mean, uh, maybe it
sounds super easy to say, "Ah, if
we change a governance model."  The
current governance model, and
then we can stay and
talk about more details, but it
has 42 people, there are seven
ministries, there are 14 people from
civil society, we recognize six
native peoples that inhabit our
region and there is a super
important issue of recognition also
from the public apparatus of this
knowledge that exists in the territory.
So, what we
wanted to show in a way is how a
governance model can be a
cornerstone of management, because when you
essentially incorporate the people
who manage from the communities
into the decision-making processes,
a management plan stops being
dormant in a library and stops
being something you have in your
pocket that you want to live and activate,
and you're looking for ways to
incorporate people into management.
So, of course, what we
wanted to do was show this.
We hope to have good results
regardless of the resources we may
have.  Mainly, the power to show and
tell that in Chile and in this last
corner of the planet,
good ideas can also emerge on how to listen to each other, even though we
are sometimes so biased in the
bubbles where we think we all think the same.
But no, we have to sit down and talk
with people who don't think the same way
precisely to be able to have an effect on
conservation management, which
I believe is the desire we all
share in this room.  That's it, let's do it
.   Go for
it.
Okay, tell us there, please,
say
yes, yes.  We hope to be there, showing
the possibilities, and if not, I still think that
beyond the recognition that comes from
outside, the important thing is that people become
immersed in what it means to be a reserve.  So, if there are
10 reserves in Chile, there should be
10 communities empowered to
manage them.
So the invitation is kind of to that, to get to know the territories, because I think one of the great challenges we have today, and it has also been mentioned, is to decentralize decision-making.  So, how
important it is when you give a microphone
to people from
peripheral communities to tell them,
hey, how, I mean, and not even
tell them, but to go and ask them what
they want to do to improve the
development of their territory.  Well, I also imagine the sense of place, going back to the panel that Steff led, the sense of place and of identity and belonging that being a reserve gives you.
Exactly.
Yes, it is that relevance, I believe, and above all, the feeling of belonging that will really make us have a motto, which is to move from protest to proposal.  And from the communities
that experience the conflicts, it is also the communities that are
empowered and inhabiting them,
and from there will come the best
innovations to solve them.
So, I believe that NGOs,
the State, and academia are all
very fundamental actors in terms of being of
service rather than just teaching something.
So, as Francisca also mentioned in the previous panel, right?, it's important when people leave and recognize the local trades in order to promote the economic development we want to foster.  So, I think that's where
the big challenges lie, right?
Excellent.  Well, I ran out of time,
but they stole a few minutes from me,
just to wrap things up because,
well, when we were talking about
the panel topics and
building on
Mauricio's presentation on biodiversity and
development, I wanted each of you to
briefly mention the challenges and
opportunities you see in
this link between
conservation and development.  How do we
link them?  Which is it?
We know there are many challenges,
but also many opportunities.  What do
you think?  Each one obviously from
their own territory and the work they have been
doing,
with that we conclude.
Let's start from the other side, Pato.
Yes. Well, I think that development—the word development is quite broad—and we certainly have the challenge of associating development with conservation. It's no longer about not developing; that is, I feel that this paradigm needs to be changed absolutely now because, to the extent that we have a healthy ecosystem, we will be able to develop in a much better way, and that's a logic that shouldn't be understood.
But I feel that to the extent that
conservation can,
uh, how to put it?  How to
support the communities that are
actually doing conservation, right?  There are
many, I'll give you an
example, there are many people in my
town who have to go out to work somewhere else
.  To the extent that we can leverage
resources for conservation, that same
person will no longer go out to work, they will
stay working in the marine
protected area, they will stay doing
surveillance, they will stay doing
monitoring and that is also development.
That.
Thank you so much.
share the challenge.
Um, I think that there, well, I'm not going to repeat myself, so but given that I took on that challenge, uh, perhaps address another one that I think, uh, one that we talked about before, uh, the importance that in governance spaces, and there is a call to everyone, in governance spaces it is very important that there are women, here there is only one woman on the panel.  I think
the challenge is to
have more women at the next meeting here, right?
Nothing personal, kids, but I think it's still
a significant issue.
Women make decisions from a different
perspective, from feeling very
different.  In other words, there is a
recognition there, I think, that, I mean, they were just
recognizing women in their
role of protecting biodiversity and
indigenous women.  So, I think that's where the
challenge lies:
incorporating more women into
decision-making in general.  And I believe that in
those same decisions and regarding
a contingency that is occurring, as
mentioned in the previous panel,
I believe that today the
challenge is also in making decisions in
the peripheries, in territories that
are not the center, whether Buenos
Aires is not the center, Santiago is not the center
, Valparaíso is not the center either,
a region that has 38 communes.  And in
that sense, uh, unfortunately we see
with some fear how decisions are made
from Santiago regarding the
biodiversity that occurs in the
regions.  Today, yesterday, the
list of priority sites in the
Valparaíso region was released.  We had
56 priority sites in our
regional biodiversity strategy, of
which the proposal has 11. And it's
not insignificant to decrease from 56 to 11. That's 45
places that are no longer
represented, but in terms of
hectares we increased.  So, also be careful
with the goals.  Goals are
super important.  Sure, we're going to
increase the protected area in
hectares, but it will decrease
in 45 places.  So, I also
believe that the decision to have
11 and not 56 has to be
made from the territories with the
community and with local authorities,
not from Santiago.  So, I believe
the challenge remains to decentralize
the country.
Antonio,
I agree with the words of my
colleagues that, of course, development
has to come from
the territories, as they
pointed out.  Um, we should
also ask our counterparts, the
government representative, to be
consistent in what they sometimes tell us.   I
think it needs to align itself.  I'm going to
tell you an anecdote.
Uh, we as an indigenous people, well
, in my community, we
practice something called
wetland management, since it's an
ancestral practice that we use to... we're
like the uncles are architects of the
wetland, they find the springs,
open them up, increase the surface area of ​​the wetland
so that it's more productive for
livestock.  So, on the one hand,
INDAP or international organizations like
FAO tell us that it is one of the
very good practices, that it is ancient, that it is
a nature-based solution that
comes from the territories of the
communities.  But on the other hand, when we encounter situations like the conflict, as I mentioned, of Lagunillas with the aquifer, they don't take into consideration the state of these traditional practices to improve an ecosystem.
How is that?  How do they do it?   They
manage the bofales with shovels and
pickaxes and make channels at higher elevations
, diverting the slopes and by
gravity the water flows and begins
after a certain period, depending on
the sector, the geology, the soil,
irrigating, irrigating
, irrigating the water.  The
watercourses arrive, they divert them and
begin to increase the surface area according
to the topography or relief of the
place.  So, a wetland that was like that, I do
n't know, in a couple of years when a rancher
manages it thinking about his wetland, the
wetland's coverage increases and at
least it's a practice that I used to do as a
child with my parents, I mean, we would say we have to go
open up the springs so that
more water flows and then we would channel it
through the hills and then we
would irrigate the terrain and it would
increase.  But of course, that's what I call a
call to people in the
State to value, that is, to
avoid a double standard.
In other words, on the one hand they tell us that resources are being given to promote these practices, but when it comes time to take relevant mitigation measures for the territory, the practices are not taken into account.  And we
have talked to them, we have spoken with the
institutions, in this case, with the CA
when with the
project owners, but
our practices in the territories are not reflected
within the mitigation measures.
So, I think I'm leaving that
message there that it's something that is
contradictory and that obviously,
considering the perspective of the
territory, a
much more harmonious development can be achieved, and not just
thinking about it from these
offices that are in Santiago.
And you give me an opening, Antonio, with this last one who decides not to make decisions, or not always from the offices, right?  I believe
the great challenge is to be equitable or
fair in the creation of
opportunities.  Sometimes we have a
tendency
to
believe that our ideas are the
best, to think that we have to decide
where things should be preserved or where
production can take place.  And I think it's very
easy to do that thing about comfort, isn't it?  From
where one is, where one
probably has all their needs
fully met, we forget that there are
many people who do not have
those opportunities, who have a
number of needs, and I think
the great challenge is to be able to generate
equal opportunities for all, right?  And from
there, uh, because sometimes
we assume that a community might
want to conserve, and perhaps what
the community wants is to produce and
develop and obtain wealth.  I'm
presenting it as something hypothetical, right?
Sometimes we romanticize
this idea of ​​conservation and
nature.  And I think we need to
break away from that a little and think a
bit about the person on the other side, that they
have the same opportunities, and think a
bit about what they want, and from there we can
start to map out the territory a bit
.  And clearly this means
democratizing decision-making, right?   Decisions should
n't be made from a
central office, but rather people in the
territory should start deciding a little more
how they want to live, how they want to
develop, what they want to do, right?  And
hopefully, he'll do it in a way that
allows him to project himself into the future,
right?  But I think what
I'm saying is uncomfortable, but I think we have to
get out of our comfort zone and
think a little like this.
Thank you so much.  Many thanks to the
four of you, Pato, Francisca, Antonio,
Sebastián.
Thank you for sharing your experiences, thank you for raising the challenges, but also the good things that are happening in the territory so that they can be examples for others.  Hey,
a big round of applause for them, please.
[Applause]
what it represents.